Ingratiating is a psychological technique in which an individual attempts to influence another person by becoming more likeable to their target. This term was coined by social psychologist Edward E. Jones, who further defined ingratiating as "a class of strategic behaviors illicitly designed to influence a particular other person concerning the attractiveness of one's personal qualities." Ingratiation research has identified some specific tactics of employing ingratiation:

Complimentary Other-Enhancement: the act of using compliments or flattery to improve the esteem of another individual.
Conformity in Opinion, Judgment, and Behavior: altering the expression of one's personal opinions to match the opinion(s) of another individual.
Self-Presentation or Self-Promotion: explicit presentation of an individual's own characteristics, typically done in a favorable manner.
Rendering Favors: Performing helpful requests for another individual.
Modesty: Moderating the estimation of one's own abilities, sometimes seen as self-deprecation.
Expression of Humour: any event shared by an individual with the target individual that is intended to be amusing.
Instrumental Dependency: the act of convincing the target individual that the ingratiator is completely dependent upon them.
Name-dropping: the act of referencing one or more other individuals in a conversation with the intent of using the reference(s) to increase perceived attractiveness or credibility.Research has also identified three distinct types of ingratiation, each defined by their ultimate goal. Regardless of the goal of ingratiation, the tactics of employment remain the same:

Acquisitive ingratiation: ingratiation with the goal of obtaining some form of resource or reward from a target individual.
Protective Ingratiation: ingratiation used to prevent possible sanctions or other negative consequences elicited from a target individual.
Significance ingratiation: ingratiation designed to cultivate respect and/or approval from a target individual, rather than an explicit reward.Ingratiation has been confused with another social psychological term, Impression management. Impression management is defined as "the process by which people control the impressions others form of them." While these terms may seem similar, it is important to note that impression management represents a larger construct of which ingratiation is a component. In other words, ingratiation is a method of impression management.

